Welcome to the Waiting Room. 


Lea Luka Sikau, Editor Ars for Nons Journal


Is there anything else left to say within an installation for nonhumans, from one human writer to another human reader? At the fringes of an art installation that is not meant for you, we try to console you on these printed pages. 


This journal is an experiment. While nonhumans are in touch with art, you can touch artistic research processes. The commissioned essays are contextualizing our thoughts around this installation - from posthuman theory to animal art. 


Creating an artwork for nonhumans - in this case smartphones - starts with a human’s inquiry. It all began when four members of the Festival University of the Ars Electronica Festival 2021 met. Discussing the 
entanglement of art, science, and technology, we wondered how we could acknowledge technology as part of our society. For over forty years now, 
the Ars Electronica Festival has showcased art created by technology for humans. But what would it mean to create art for nonhuman technology instead? For the objects that usually create art for us…


Why and how create art for nonhumans?


This was our initial question. What started off as a thinking model ultimately developed into the art installation you are seeing or hearing right now, while waiting for your phone. On our path to approximate the “why“ and “how“, we arrived at challenges of more fundamental nature. These were four overarching ones: 


Collision of Binaries
How to make an art installation that is queering binaries 
by letting them collide (human/nonhuman; art space/staircase; sound/image; lesezirkel/research journal)? 


Nons of the Art World
Exceeding the smartphone as nonhuman technology, 
there is a broader implication within our provocative term non. Who are the nons? A non-human, a non-visitor or 
somebody that is not represented and targeted by the way 
we practice art nowadays? How could we reveal ethical issues present in the art market’s socio-economic 
frameworks via this model?
Personification Trap
Throughout the entire development process, our team’s highest priority was not to personify nonhuman 
technology. Projecting one’s concepts onto somebody other than oneself is as easy as it is problematic. Being bound to think in human terms, we necessarily lack the nonhuman perspective. Consciously working with this gap, we avoided assumptions about the phone’s moment immersed in art.


Adaptation of Human Behaviour
No matter how much we tested and tried our installation beforehand, we could not foresee the human’s reaction to it. How did you interact with the installation? Did you 
place your phone in a box and follow the instructions exemplarily? Or, did you use the boxes next to the couches to charge your phone? Humans waiting for phones next to humans waiting for their tools to be ready again. How do you negotiate the fact that you can only see a fraction of the installation, as it is not made for you? 50,000 years after the first cave paintings, you find yourself back in Plato’s cave. Does it make you perform differently in this exhibition right now?


This journal is a reflection on how these four inquiries can be thought through and to which avenues they lead our writers. 
The articles intend to start off a discourse with you, the human 
in this scenario. Each of them explores the engagement with 
nonhumans. You can read them in any order - from parrots
over fungi to electric circuits and back.