Attunement: form in motion
Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing


To nurture and protect even small fragments of livability, we must get to know the lives of others, human and nonhuman. The Anthropocene collates projects of erasure, and we forget that we need companions. What might it take to bring us back into remembrance?–1


I use the word “attunement” in this essay to refer to attempts to get to know, through alignment, how others express themselves in the world. I’m particularly interested in forms of alignment that refuse Cartesian dreams of minds in
contact. Getting to know living beings other than humans has been 
blocked by scholars’ desires to “talk” with those beings,
or at least to make Enlightenment kinds of meaning and value
together with them. Yet, there are other ways in which living
beings express themselves, and instead of expecting them to meet our 
standards of communication and status, we can expand our own repertoires 
of listening and attending. For many animals, and most plants and fungi, 
what I will call “form” is an essential expression of being. Consider a tree:
the shape of its trunk and branches tells its life story—of sun or shady neighbors, of seasonal rains, diseases, fungal companions, herbivory, or human pruning. With warmth and rain and sun, new branches grow quickly and spread widely; 
in the shade, they straighten or curve toward the light.–2 But shape is not
enough. Color, texture, turgidity, sound, and smell (or, more broadly, chemical 
sensitivities) are also elements of what I am calling “form.” “Form” is in quotation marks here as a reminder of the specificity of this use, which exceeds shape.
Form, in this sense, often comes into itself through motion. For animals such as humans, form coalesces in our movements, as we rise and sleep, walk and ride, talk and read. This feature of human lives—coming into form whether as habitus or in abrupt change—has something in common with the life expressions
of other beings. Here, I draw on mycologist Alan Rayner’s book Degrees of 
Freedom, in which he argues that the patterns created by fungal growth resemble the everyday patterns of human activity. The delineations traced by mycelia (the bodies of fungi, which take the form of threads in wood or soil) indicate where
they are finding food, where substrates recommend themselves, and where 
explorations peter out. Human traces of activity show related features of our 
livelihoods.–3 Recognition of human commonality can lead our attention to these expressions of life-making—in attunement to form. Indeed, form in motion
is also relevant to plants and fungi, which redistribute themselves and their 
progeny across space in ways that tell us how lives are being made.
In a former mining area in Denmark, now a nature reserve called Søby 
Brunkulslejer, artist and theorist Elaine Gan and I spent several years, 
sporadically, getting to know the form of roots and fungi, working together as 
mycorrhiza.–4 Søby has a long anthropogenic history involving Bronze Age
deforestation and annual burning in the making of sandy heathlands. Yet, below the sand is something rather older: a thick layer of lignite (soft brown coal). 
Dug out by hand during World War II and increasingly with machines through the 1960s, the mining of brown coal and the pumping of groundwater stopped in 1970, leaving behind a “lunar landscape”. The sand dug up for brown coal now lies in great loose heaps called “sand tips”, which can be thirty meters high. The holes left 
behind turned into acidic lakes as the water returned.


Amazingly, trees have grown across these sandy ruins: first, through tree-planting programs mandated by the state; and, more recently, through the spread of trees on their own.–5 Gan and I were interested in this regrowth: What allowed trees to take hold in what first appeared as a barren wasteland? Why 
did some kinds of trees not only survive but also spread while 
others did not? Our investigation of form offered answers to 
these questions: the trees that flourished were those that could best collect water and nutrients—with the assistance of 
mycorrhizal fungi.


“Mycorrhiza” (both singular and collective singular) refers to
the joint organs made by fungi and tree roots, with benefits
to each. Fungi gather water and nutrients for the trees, and
they eat carbohydrates produced by the trees’ photosynthesis.
The forms we investigated were ectomycorrhiza—root-fungal
symbioses in which fungal cells wrap around roots that have
specially developed to reach for them. Plant and fungus
coproduce these structures to exchange water, nutrients, and
carbohydrates. Ectomycorrhiza are forms that emerge only in the relation between organisms—they require both fungi and plant roots. Trees have other kinds of roots as well (for example, for exploration), and the roots that specialize in working with fungi wither and die if no fungal relationship develops. This, then, is a classic example of mutualism and is relatively well known. What was unusual about our project was our attempt to understand this symbiosis through the natural history of form. Working in the hills formed by the tipped-out sand, Gan and I found a plethora of root tips wrapped with fungi just a few 
centimeters under the surface. Elsewhere, researchers have found more mycorrhizalization in brown coal sand tips than in surrounding forests (brown coal fragments may help fungi gather at least water if not carbon).–6 At Søby, we were offered a privileged way to appreciate form, because the sand tips are loose and friable. Small fragments of brown coal are mixed with the sand, but there is comparatively little recent organic material or clay. This meant we could shake 
off and wash away the material 
surrounding the roots fairly easily, revealing their shapes and colors. (When I tried this same exercise in organic 
clayey soils, the soil clotted around the roots, and even the gentlest washing 
broke off the tips, after which, form was impossible to grasp.)


Meanwhile, we found that although several kinds of trees, including various pines, birches, spruce, and even a few oaks and beeches, have found their way to the former mines at Søby, only lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) has colonized the remaining open sand tips with any success. This meant we could get to know 
almost all the roots we met in the open sand as belonging to lodgepoles, the 
better to compare them with roots from more diverse, overgrown sites.


Mycorrhiza are a form that neither root nor fungus has without the other. The 
magic of our work was exploring that form. Different trees and different fungi made different forms, and we were delighted to get to know them that way. Many humanists recoil from taxonomic names for fear of their abstract authority, but for us, meeting up with names and lives was wrapped together. To get to know roots and fungi, to practice mycorrhizal attunement, we dug, scraped, buried our hands in dirt, crawled, and lay flat on the ground to gently uncover the city threading through the coal-laden sand. We followed roots, washed them, and laid them out to sketch and photograph. We watched them with magnifying lenses and stereomicroscopes; we looked them up in atlases and scientific 
reports. We learned their official names, and we tried to describe them. 
We wanted to know how they expressed themselves, how they maneuvered in
the world. This was a matter of attuning ourselves to form.


__1
The project on which this paper reports formed part of Aarhus University
Research on the Anthropocene
(https://anthropocene.au.dk/),
supported by the Danish National
Research Foundation.


__2
See Francis Hallé, In Praise of Plants, trans. David Lee (Portland, OR: TimberPress, 2002); 
Andrew S. Mathews, 
“Landscapes and Throughscapes 
in Italian Forest Worlds: 
Thinking Dramatically about 
the Anthropocene,” Cultural 
Anthropology 33, no. 3 (2018): 386–414.


__3
See Alan D. M. Rayner, Degrees 
of Freedom: Living in Dynamic Boundaries (London: Imperial College Press, 1997).


__4
Elaine Gan and I were joined by many helpful, inspiring individuals, including Nathalia Brichet, Thiago Cardoso, Pierre du Plessis, and 
Mathilde Højrup. Our work could not have happened without the guidance of mycologists Henning Knudsen and Mikako Sasa.
See Anna Tsing and Elaine Gan, with Daniel Sullivan, “Using Natural History in the Study of Industrial Ruins,” Journal of 
Ethnobiology 38, no. 1 (2018): 39–54, plus online supplement.


__5
See Nils Bubandt and
Anna Tsing, “Feral 
Dynamics of Post-
Industrial Ruin: 
An Introduction,” Journal of Ethnobiology 38, 
no. 1 (2018): 1–7; idem, 
“An Ethnoecology for the Anthropocene: How a 
Former Brown-Coal Mine 
in Denmark Shows Us the Feral Dynamics of Post-
Industrial Ruin,” Journal of Ethnobiology 38, no. 1 (2018): online supplement.


__6
See Babette Münzenberger, Judith Golldack, et al., “Abundance, Diversity, and Vitality of Mycorrhizae of Scots Pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) in Lignite Recultivation Sites,” Mycorrhiza 14 (2004): 193–202.


__7
Reinhard Agerer, 
ed., Colour Atlas of
Ectomycorrhizae, Parts 1–15 (Schwäbisch Gmünd, 
Germany: Einhorn-Verlag, 1987–2012).