Theater in the absence of theater
Stefan Kaegi


Theater likes to surprise its audience. But can 
theater also surprise itself?


I once visited a dance performance in which a small, but very visible, black fly flew through the completely white set to the surprise of the people on stage. The audience rejoiced at the unexpected encounter. However, the dancer, covered entirely in white paint, refused to notice the fly. They tried to cover up its presence, but in contrast to their intention, the fly grew in the audience’s perception and became a fundamental part of the evening. 


Years later, I saw an open-air performance of Genet‘s Zofen which remains similarly present in my memory. The actresses were declaiming text in the usual theatrical, over-excited voice until a dog in the immediate vicinity of the open-air stage 
picked up on their tone. Their barking drowned out the 
actresses until they lowered their tone, which I felt benefitted the performance.


I also remember a performance of Marlene Monteiro Freita‘s 
energetic Bacantes, not only because of the sensational brass and dancers, but especially because of an unplanned 
dramaturgical highlight of the evening. A spotlight began to burn; it suited the play so well that the stagehands waited a 
moment to call the fire department. An unforgettable evening.


For me, the best thing about theater is its glitches. What affects me most are moments when things get out of hand, when 
someone doesn‘t know what to do with the text, or when force majeure disrupts the plan of the production. When the performance falters, the audience collectively holds its breath. There is a sense of joint responsibility for how things could proceed. The potential of a social utopia pervades the theater space. 


I will never forget how a performer in Frankfurt fainted on 
the open stage. Her fellow performers tried to cover it up 
for minutes. But her theatrical slump in the middle of a 
monologue was so real that even the person sitting next to me woke up from his cozy theatrical slumber. He sensed that the room was electrified by a completely different attention. When the actress regained consciousness, I sensed a feeling of care coming from the audience space.


What can theater learn from such moments?
How can theater deal with the fact that the most unique, most lasting moments occur when the 
performance is interrupted, when everything in the room spins out of control, when the actors on stage and all that they have rehearsed in months of 
rehearsals are overtaken by something that was 
not created by humans?


Glitches have the potential to create a sense of 
embarrassment. But what subsumes this 
sentiment? Stage professionals like to hold on to the protocol of their performance at all costs – even when everything in the room is going in the wrong direction. They over-act. As the loss of reality of 
those you just admired is hard to bear, it is 
precisely this attempt that creates a strange feeling. If, on the other hand, the performance offers the 
performers space to perceive the unpredictable as a gift of the moment – to appreciate it and make it visible for all – such moments have the potential to become magical. This is what I experienced in a sensational improvisation by Theater Hora in collaboration with a free jazz troupe, in which a performer with Down syndrome undermined all categories of performance in an ineffable way. The often-serene musicians did not try to overplay it. Rather, they gave them the space they occupied 
anyway in the audience‘s attention. 


It is an theatre-rule that animals and children have no place on the stage as they outshine other staged people. From my experience, the opposite 
is the case: children and animals are often more 
interesting than professional actors. Only in the 
absence of the meticulously staged and 
virtuously acting human being does theatre 
become truly exciting. When the concentrated 
attention of an entire audience is directed towards something that is stronger than all that humans 
can control, a god emerges from the machine 
(deus ex machina) and the art of theater becomes live art. Living art. Art that takes place only in the now and is therefore unique every single time. 
My first attempt to direct a nonhuman performer was over 20 years ago on the rehearsal stage of the Giessen Institute for Applied Theater Studies together with my colleague Bernd Ernst. The performance of our director duo Hygiene Heute was called Ulla von Sollingen. 
In the piece, a Great Dane dog of the same name was trained to sit still for 20 minutes, positioned on a 
pedestal. This exercise in discipline in front of an audience was counteracted in our theater experiment by two remote-controlled cars labeled “cat“ and “mouse“ that aroused the curiosity of the four-legged performer by circling around her pedestal. The rest can be 
imagined. Any outcome of the experiment was 
conceivable, none fundamentally wrong. The hesitation visible in the dog‘s face between duty and instinct 
became the beauty of the performance. 


This first nonhuman lady was soon followed by others: 
In Europe Dances. 48 hours of the guinea pig congress 
for the opening of the Vienna Museumsquartier, 
72 rodents entered the stage. We built an edible map 
of Europe made of vegetables, which the animals shared over two days, while historians and political scientists tried to classify and live-interpret the unpredictable spectacle. To this soundtrack, the audience followed the diplomatic power plays between the fanged alphatians through field glasses. 


A few years later, for Locusts, I set up an entire 
terrarium at the Schauspielhaus Zurich as an image for the hedge-fund captitalism that Franz Münterfering scolded at the time. The props department planted 
crops in the theater‘s courtyard, feeding the biblical 
hunger of the nearly 10,000 insects that elsewhere 
are fought primarily as a plague. On stage, they fed 
and reproduced, set to music by a cellist and the 
interpretations of an entomologist, a nutritionist, and 
a physicist.


In the meantime, I was less and less concerned with 
getting animals to perform certain actions or even 
training them to perform some kind of artistic act. 
Rather, it was about giving space to life unfolding in 
an unpredictable way.


In Temple du présent. Solo for an Octopus Nathalie Kuttel and 
Judith Zagury spent a lot of time at the side of a cephalopod that 
played with them at least as much as they played with her. As
common vocabulary of language, light and music emerged during 
the rehearsals. We entered into communication with the animal, 
or at least into an exchange of images and haptics…


In such performances, the concepts of language, signs, art, and 
communication become blurred. On the human side, a view of what one believes to be another body becomes sharper. But at least as much, we in the audience observe ourselves observing our 
nonhuman counterparts, projecting into their performance our 
emotions and the limits of our understanding. 






























A similar thing happens in the face of machines and other objects in the theater, when they serve not only as props or stage sets but act. For almost five years now, a humanoid copy of the writer Thomas 
Melle has been touring the theater world in our joint production 
Uncanny Valley. The lifeless artificial body performs a lecture about its own origins on stage next to a large screen. Its facial expressions and gestures are animated by over 30 servo motors. And again and again, audience members confirm to me how much they recognize themselves in this robot, even feel with it, while the humanoid copy 
(or the thirty motors) reflects on Thomas Melle‘s life in first person. 


What happens in 
such moments of 
identification 
with nonhumans? 
What comes to 
the fore when 
the human takes 
a step back?






Theater has always been an interplay 
between humans and technology. 
Automated sound consoles, lighting 
controllers, and mechanical trains 
trigger essential components of the 
staging. Mechanical processes frame 
the staged life. It seems an interesting 
next step to leave the human being on 
stage out of the equation for once. 
Of course, this does not mean that 
there are no people involved. On the 
contrary, I would say that the human being in the auditorium slips into the center here, the audience enters the stage as a subject. 


In my production Black Box, a Phantom Theater for 
1 Person, this was the stage of the Volkstheater in 
Vienna, which had been turned into a deserted zone for months by the pandemic. Every five minutes, one 
person at a time entered the theater with headphones via backstage areas and costume departments, crawled into the understage area or prompter‘s box to see what is so rarely seen here: Nothing. An empty stage space. 800 tacit seats in stalls and balconies. The movements of the moving lights, precisely coordinated with the soundtrack, transformed the theater into a kind of ghost theater, where only now and then, somewhere far in the back of the hall, a single other person could be seen, 
at a place where one was supposed to sit exactly five minutes later, guided by the nonhuman clockwork of the staging. 


The more precisely technology is tailored to us the more it becomes part of our body, an immersion 
that theater is increasingly seeking. Some of the 
productions of our theater collective Rimini Protokoll resemble algorithms that wrap themselves around the body of their users like a wonky exoskeleton. In pieces like Situation Rooms, Urban Nature or Remote X, there is a lot of space for the audience. Computer voices or 
subjective camera movements, binaural audios and sophisticated scenography invite the audience’s bodies into the center of the stage action. One walks through staged spaces or an invisible sound architecture in the urban space and perceives the events as an acoustically extended reality.


Eye to eye with the nonhuman, it is up to the audience 
to fill a staging with life. To rub the foreseen against 
the unforeseen. Surrounded by nonhumans, we are challenged to define ourselves in our humanity. The audience determines where reality may triumph over artistic will. Whether and how this will succeed in Linz I cannot wait to experience.