A Laboratory of Sensations: Listening for Texture (excerpt)
Sophie Seita


Sometimes peeling a pomegranate can sound like the crackling of a small fire. 
Or glass spinning. Or the universe exploding.


How do we listen for texture? Normally when we think of texture, we think of 
something we can touch—something haptic or visual, definitely something 
external to us, like a chenille or corduroy cushion, where we either sense or see how much the material might give. To listen for texture means to de-emphasize 
a dominant sensorial system over others. Can one sense gain some qualities of another and undo the senses’ strict separation? How do we create frisky 
synesthetic intermingling?–1 Suddenly texture is also inside us. It can’t be seen 
or touched but felt. To listen for texture also qualifies what “hearing” might mean. 


At the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, I witnessed a digital performance and 
somatic video work by the Montréal-based choreographer Hanna Sybille Müller and the dancer and poet Erin Robinsong—one that indirectly digested these 
questions and provocations, or rather allowed me to digest them. First presented in various live performances as part of their research process, Polymorphic 
Microbe Bodies, was reconceived as a “somatic video” with a small in-person
audience for Tangente Danse in Montréal in April 2021. The video was then edited and screened online for a week with binaural sound; that is, sound that was 
recorded and edited spatially to create a three-dimensional feeling as if you 
were in the room. Digital audiences were encouraged to listen with headphones to immerse themselves in this ambient sonic scenery. 
Often when we watch dance and performance, we sit up vertically, our eyes are 
directed straight ahead. This, Sybille and Erin tell me in conversation, is antithetical to the experience of dance. Video, too, is an intensely visual medium. So, they invited both their in-person and virtual audience to lie down and either view the piece from 
a horizontal position or to close their eyes and feel the dance through sound and sensation. The somatic video–2 consists largely of Erin “playing” various vegetables and fruits, peeling, cutting, scraping, juicing everything into one big bowl and Sybille guiding the audience vocally through a meditative experience. They are joined by 
four dancers who assist in setting up the space, respond to Sybille’s vocal guidance, and eventually weave through the space, interacting with various objects and the audience. Later on, they are also joined by a drummer who adds to the botanical or bodily orchestra.–3 


The artists describe the piece as “a laboratory of sensations,” in which “the audience is choreographed by the experience.” The work sends us on a journey into the 
textures, fissures, and juices of matter and bodies, but also engages a broader 
theoretical discourse on microbial existence, thinking about the cohabitation of 
multiple species in our bodies, down to germs, bacteria, and viruses. Inspired 
by microbial research and the recognition that our bodies are in fact home to 
multispecies communities, are that community, are explicitly not an individual, 
Erin and Sybille became interested in exploring how we feel internal multiplicity. 
How can we translate this research while also having an embodied understanding of it? We have strangers living inside of us, Donna Haraway reminds us: “I am vastly outnumbered by my tiny companions; better put, I become an adult human being in company with these tiny messmates. To be one is always to become with many.”–4


I asked myself, if I were to write the closed captions for this piece, what imaginative descriptive language can capture this sonic and embodied landscape that I 
experienced? Suddenly this inquiry into texture became a problem of translation. 
I began quite simply and methodically.
Sound of chewing, saliva, 
someone eating with an open mouth.


Sound of bare feet on the floor. 
Sound of shuffling and objects being dragged. The sound of things being readied.


Inaudible French. Then, someone says:


“Imagine sound as touch, sight as touch. Imagine that the room that you’re in right now is a body.”


Touch is not just haptic—we’re invited to think of “sound and sight as a form of touch.”


Erin squeezes a grapefruit into a big transparent 
glass jar. At first, it’s a lot of juice, like an avalanche, then we make out individual droplets.


Grapefruit sounds like pee. 


Erin drops the two fruity halves onto the table, 
they make a thumping sound. 


What is your favorite sound? How is it made? When can 
you hear it? Are you hearing it now?


When do you feel sound in your body?


If you could hear any sound you want, what would it be? 


What sound is most meaningful to you?


Do you remember the last sound you heard before 
this question? –10


All of this is still relatively factual, an observation of what happens. But how do I do justice to this experience beyond descriptive clarity, especially as a writer and performer who also experiments with a material and sensorial poetics and who wants to unlearn some of her training in scholarly distance? How do I listen with my whole body as a chorus of multiple, interconnected resonating chambers? For example, I know I can feel vibration and rhythm with my fingers, which I can move—like a stethoscope—to other parts of my body, listening in. I experience sound through the soles of my feet, through the movement of my diaphragm, through the tightening or relaxing of my jaw. With this awareness, how do I listen now?


This type of work requires new forms of listening-writing on my part, perhaps similarly textured, similarly playful and in tune with the other resonant materials and bodies I encounter. 


Sound of fabric brushing against skin. Sound of roughness. Like clearing your throat. Sound of a criss-cross pattern.


Do these sounds make me want to move my legs? Does the sensation reside in that in-between space between imagination and action? (I once heard that our neurons already “know” on a cellular level about a split second before we 
consciously make a decision what we will do). Or maybe it’s more like the rhythm travelling vibrationally through floor and limbs, testing our orientation, our 
proprioception—where is this body of mine? 
Sound of a spoon being dropped on a wooden table. 


I become aware of my dry mouth. 


Sound of grapes being slipped into a jar full of undefined liquids.


What do I pay attention to? 


I realise that to some extent my experience of sound is tied to what I see. 
Without the video, it is actually quite hard for me to describe what I hear. 
Maybe I could draw the sound like a graphic score by Cornelius Cardew or 
György Ligeti or maybe something more humorously cartoonish by Cathy 
Berberian.–5 Or I could make a Dada sound poem jumping from 
“blloTTtt–oouafffffff’ to ‘grrrrrIIIIIIIOOOOUUUUp – p p p p.”


Would you know what that sounded like?


The approximation of a like at first seems a good guide. It sounds like someone’s tummy rumbling. It sounds like a door opening. But it’s just a shorthand; I call upon memories of sounds without actually capturing the complexity of sound. 


Sound of a lump or thump I feel in my chest. Sound of a tin being opened. Sound of the crackling of a shell, not the thin sound of an eggshell but the pulpy hard shell of a granadilla. All sounds go pulpy. Or gooey. What’s a tart sound? A tangy texture?


Suddenly I’m inside my own body. Gargling or gurgling away to my own rhythm. 
I wonder if all organs have a pulse or the capacity to hear internal movement. 
I do not know what my organs sound like beyond sonic clichés of the squishy 
muted flow of blood whooshing through my arteries or the supposed crackling hiss of my brain. Can I hear my eyeballs moving? What does my sore back sound like? Everything is beginning to resonate, respond. I know how my body 
resonates when I sing. Not just the obvious cavities but the fascia (that soft 
tissue coating all our organs and muscles) also react to vibration. How do I know about this resonance? I know this because from the age of 15 I have been 
intermittently learning a somatic vocal technique that I may well describe as unlearning “singing,” by which I mean not forcing my voice to sound a particular way or not applying techniques to fix it or force it into shape. I know that my body resonates because when I listen to it (my body, but also the performance I 
experience), I notice small vibrations in my jawbone, my clavicle, travelling up and down into my skull or even all the way into my feet or because a part of my body simply comes into focus as if someone had pointed a little torch on it. Or maybe I notice that my jaw loosens, that my tongue relaxes, or I feel the variable density or permeability of my soft palate. I feel as if there’s a whole beehive in my head, there’s so much going on! Maybe I notice that I’m letting go of my habit of clenching or of pushing up breath or sound rather than letting it just arrive. 


Using our senses is riddled with sensorial and perceptual habits, often 
unconscious ones. Not all of them are “bad” and it’s not a matter of gaining 
more control over our senses but perhaps believing in or surrendering to their autonomous organization. We can begin by asking ourselves what the brain 
does with all these stimuli and follow them around as if going on an internal 
walk or hike. Learning more about anatomical and physiological structures allows us to perceive, notice, and experience these bodily or sensorial realities or changes in response to a prompt or stimulus. We might notice changes in our blood pressure, warmth, vibration, the toning or relaxation of muscles, or learn to read vestibular feedback (posture, balance, navigation, gravity, gaze stability) or cutaneous feedback (pressure, itch).


“Soften your tongue.”


I am so familiar with these kinds of prompts to notice, experience, and associate that my body reacts immediately but not necessarily how I expect it to.


If it’s not clear by now, let me make it explicit: the piece investigates feelingly how 
acts of language can affect the body, direct and disperse attention, and create sensation. 
But it also asks us what happens when sensations interact? Language has the power 
to facilitate a bodily awakening or reckoning. For that it need not be voiced. 
Descriptions in the form of captions similarly shape the experience for D/deaf and hard-of-hearing audiences, more specifically their emotional or embodied responses. Jessica A. Holmes describes deaf percussionist Evelyn Glennie’s technique of “touching the sound” as experiencing “different pitches and sounds resonating in her body—the chest, the stomach, the tip of the pinkie finger.”–6 Holmes reminds us that:


Deafness only deepens musicology’s sense of what music is—its social, 
relational, and material contours. Music does not simply exceed the limits of aurality; it exceeds the acoustical parameters of sound itself. “Sound” can be 
a primarily visual-spatial experience as we watch objects and bodies vibrate 
and move as music passes through them.–7 


A deepening of our understanding of sound also ought to make us question the 
conventional distinction between active and passive listening, usually based on 
expertise and experience and rooted in a notion of mastery, as Holmes suggests, and 
to which I would add active and passive reading.–8 The sound of scraping the flesh 
out of a coconut. Or rather, the sound of vulnerability for being seen for who we are.


Erin tosses seeds into a big tinny bowl. They sound like a rainmaker. It is frustrating 
to me how difficult it is to find a precise or poetically dense descriptive language for 
my sensory experiences. Oh the riches of experience, oh the poverty of this linguistic translation. But maybe translation is experience and not a product, as Sawako 
Nakayasu recently proposed in our joint panel on “Performing Textures” at Bard 
College. An audience member shared after my workshop that as someone on the 
autism spectrum they naturally experienced the senses as connected, not rigidly 
separate, and that language often had a material quality, a palpable texture and 
sound that was experienced by the other senses.–9


The musician throws in percussive accents, adding a recognisably musical dimension to the guttural landscape, and yet simultaneously nudges us to recognise Erin’s fruity melange as very much music in and of itself. 


Sound of plates being moved around. Sound of the yawn of a tree. Sound of sleepy-
sloppy limbs relaxing into cacophonous cushions. Sound of serene alertness. 


My critical mind pipes up again tugging on the serenity-strings. Can I really use this definitional language ‘sound of’ with its apparent claim to universality? Should it be 
“My sound of” or “I hear” or “I sense”? And what are cacophonous cushions? I think it’s what my singing teacher meant when she said “step into a roaring silence”. Stepping into that paradox means becoming aware of that raucous orchestra inside you. Try it. It’s wild.


This reminds me of Pauline Oliveros’s simple but perceptive question “When are you listening to what you are now hearing?” It’s one of many prompts from her ground-breaking (sound-breaking?) project and book Sonic Meditations which develops her theory of deep listening. For me, this is not a (potentially able-bodied) distinction 
between physiological hearing and conceptual listening; it’s about the difference in what we pay attention to. For Oliveros, “the ear is a faithful collector of all sounds that can be gathered within its limits of frequency and amplitude. Sounds beyond the limits of the ear may be gathered by other sensory systems of the body” (p. 19).






























I want to end by returning to my earlier premise: that the acts and textures of language have real effects on the body and create new material realities. 


What makes language material for me is when we treat it as if we didn’t quite understand it logically or at least not immediately. Materials like clay and wool or lemon peel and metal sit well next to one another, they rub shoulders. We do not challenge or doubt how something so wrinkly and waxed can sit next to something so shiny and solid. 


For a while now I’ve been keeping a material diary, where I explore a particular 
material. I’ve also extended this haptic listening or visual and linguistic tactility into workshop settings and into my own practice. In a recent video-essay called Cloudiness, I play with different materials and with language, asking how this type of tactile play can create a translation of other non-linguistic sensory experiences. Translation is sound, is material, is movement, a visual-haptic echo chamber. Is translation always the retracing of shapes already carved, of thoughts already voiced, now tasked with 
a different sort of materialization on a variable scale of proximity? Experimental 
translation or experimental writing more broadly makes its scaffolding visible. To 
intentionally upset the truism of the invisible translator and her invisible labor, the 
scaffold visualizes a material process. This making-visible does not aim for a 
transparency of meaning. Instead, experimental translations side with a certain 
cloudiness... In that video just as in this essay, I want to think near or alongside the 
tactility of translation, its harboring of touch. Its receptivity to other materials. What it 
picks up along the way. Working with language, we feel the words’ edges, listen for worlds.


When we listen for texture, we don’t listen for content, or if we do it is the contentment of content, the containment, the tent it pitches over us. When we listen for texture, we might see a work’s ridges, contours, and arcs, how it passes our day. We learn about process, a story of making, but also an imaginary landscape freed from the strictures imposed on real bodies. When we listen for texture, we brush up against histories, find clearings in the forest that confront us with our complicity or our desire for 
community. There we find a gathering space, and are held.


Short artist statement: 


The core of my practice is language, language as material. Everything spins around it and radiates outward from there. My work layers references to other artworks, 
literary and theoretical texts, 
classical music and opera, 
alongside my own experiences and fictional creations. Most of the narratives, characters, and scenes in writing are rooted in queer and feminist commitments, studied and performed in a non-linear, non-programmatic, and insistently playful fashion. Artifice and abstraction are key to this engagement, as are a real curiosity about embodiment, materiality, and tactility. What’s a sensual or embodied encounter that is still conceptually rigorous and inspired by a conversation with other works and voices across time and space? I engage these questions of dialogue and contact through performance, lecture performance, video, sound pieces, and social practice. The work usually sits or swims between genres and media, united through an exploration within and interwoven through language. But language isn’t just a tool with a clear output; it comes with context and history. The way we use language is deeply political: the worlds it opens up or closes down, the violence or subversion that resides within it. Since language is often dominated by structures of knowledge that were formed by exclusionary and normative discourses then these structures need to give way to other forms of sense making. This is where difficulty comes in. My work creates intention and tension to allow for that grappling. To delve into the in-between spaces. I’m curious about what can’t be translated, what can’t be communicated. How do we acknowledge ambiguity and multiplicity? 
I’m interested in the uncertain, 
provisional, fragmented, and often confusing space of language as a site where we can resist the need to be clear, sure, and programmatic. I work with an expanded understanding of translation as 
a movement not just across languages but also materials and media. This translational lens draws on my experience of being a multilingual writer negotiating questions of authorship and forms of address and agency. Translation invites us to challenge value systems and hierarchies.




__1 
I have not read up on the 
latest scientific studies on 
synaesthesia in either adults 
or children; my observations 
are rooted in my own embodied experience of what I know 
is sensorially possible or 
believe could be possible, 
which is that sweet spot 
between imagination and 
graspable thereness, which 
is also my definition of reading.


__2 
Trailer for Polymorphic 
Microbe Bodies: https://vimeo.com/491337435; trailer for the theatrical performance: https://vimeo.com/604832681.


__3 
There were 3 audience members, 
1 musician, 4 dancers, plus 
Erin and Sybille. The other 
dancers were: Diego Gil, Hanako Hoshimi-Caines, Emmanuel Jouthe, Lara Oundjian, and the musician was Michel F. Côté.


__4 
Donna Haraway, with Thyrza Nichols Goodeve, “Speaking Resurgence to Despair/ I’d Rather Stay With the Trouble,” Brooklyn Rail, Dec 2017-Jan 2018; online at < https://brooklynrail.org/2017/12/art/DONNA-HARAWAY-with-Thyrza-Nichols-Goodeve>.


__5 
See for example, Stripsody: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0dNLAhL46xM


__6 
Jessica A. Holmes, ‘Expert 
Listening beyond the Limits of Hearing: Music and Deafness’, Journal of the American 
Musicological Society, vol. 70, number 1, pp. 171–220 (p. 172).


__7 
Holmes, p. 211.


__8 
See Holmes, p. 212.


__9 
Mel Baggs, an expert in 
experimental touch-based 
experience, was an autistic 
non-verbal artist and activist whose video-essay 
In My Language (posted to YouTube in 2007) offers a 
choreographic, tactile, and 
sonic engagement with objects in their domestic space. 
Halfway through the video some text appears—
“A Translation”— in the form 
of automated voiceover 
and subtitles: a powerful 
manifesto that pushes back against able-bodied 
conceptualisations of 
what constitutes a “language,” legibility, and the category 
of personhood.


__10 
Oliveros, Deep listening, 34-56